>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, APRIL 11: THE
UNITED STATES AND CUBA TAKE
ANOTHER STEP TOWARD NORMALIZING
RELATIONS; THE OBAMAS RELEASE
THEIR TAX RETURNS-- WHAT THEY
PAID AND WHAT THEY GAVE; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE
FUTURE OF SOLAR ENERGY-- IS
HAWAII A CASE STUDY OF WHAT
MIGHT GO WRONG?
>> Reporter: WE DRIVE UP, AND
YOU HAVE THESE LOVELY SOLAR
PANELS ON YOUR ROOF.
HOW'S THAT WORKING OUT FOR YOU?
>> (LAUGHS)
IT'S NOT!
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA MET PRIVATELY
THIS AFTERNOON WITH CUBAN
PRESIDENT RAUL CASTO, THE FIRST
MEETING OF ITS KIND IN MORE THAN
50 YEARS AND THE LATEST IN A
SERIES OF DEVELOPMENTS POINTING
TO A NORMALIZATION OF RELATIONS
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES.
THIS AFTER A WIDELY PHOTOGRAPHED
HANDSHAKE LAST NIGHT AND A PHONE
CALL BETWEEN THE TWO MEN EARLIER
IN THE WEEK.
THE NEWSHOUR'S WILLIAM BRANGHAM
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: AT THE SUMMIT OF
THE AMERICAS MEETING TODAY IN
PANAMA, BOTH PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
CUBAN PRESIDENT RAUL CASTRO
HAILED THE RECENT IMPROVEMENT IN
RELATIONS BETWEEN THEIR TWO
LONG-ESTRANGED NATIONS.
>> THIS SHIFT IN U.S. POLICY
REPRESENTS A TURNING POINT FOR
OUR ENTIRE REGION.
THE FACT THAT PRESIDENT CASTRO
AND I ARE BOTH SITTING HERE
TODAY MARKS AN HISTORIC
OCCASION.
AND I FIRMLY BELIEVE THAT IF WE
CAN CONTINUE TO MOVE FORWARD AND
SEIZE THIS MOMENTUM IN PURSUIT
OF MUTUAL INTERESTS, THEN BETTER
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND CUBA WILL CREATE NEW
OPPORTUNITIES FOR COOPERATION
ACROSS OUR REGION.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT CASTRO
OFFERED A LITANY OF COMPLAINTS
ABOUT ONGOING U.S. TREATMENT OF
HIS COUNTRY BUT SAID HE DIDN'T
HOLD OBAMA RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT
CAME BEFORE HIS PRESIDENCY,
INCLUDING THE ECONOMIC BLOCKADE
THE U.S. HAS MAINTAINED AGAINST
CUBA FOR OVER HALF A CENTURY.
>> (translated): WE'VE
PUBLICLY EXPRESSED TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA OUR RECOGNITION OF HIS
VALIANT DECISION TO INVOLVE
HIMSELF IN A DEBATE WITH THE
CONGRESS OF HIS COUNTRY TO PUT
AN END TO THE BLOCKADE AGAINST
CUBA.
>> Reporter: HOURS LATER, THE
TWO LEADERS HAD THEIR PRIVATE
MEETING.
LAST NIGHT, THEY SHOOK HANDS--
YET ANOTHER PUBLIC GESTURE OF
GOODWILL.
THEY MADE HEADLINES WITH ANOTHER
HANDSHAKE BACK IN 2013 AT NELSON
MANDELA'S FUNERAL IN SOUTH
AFRICA.
THE GATHERING IN PANAMA IS JUST
THE LATEST STEP IN PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S EFFORTS TO RENEW
RELATIONS WITH CUBA, WHICH HAVE
BEEN FROZEN SINCE PRESIDENT
DWIGHT EISENHOWER SEVERED
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS OVER
CONCERNS THAT FIDEL CASTRO WAS
TURNING HIS ISLAND NATION INTO
AN OUTPOST OF SOVIET COMMUNISM.
BUT LAST DECEMBER, AFTER 18
MONTHS OF SECRET TALKS,
PRESIDENT OBAMA ANNOUNCED THE
RESTORATION OF DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES AND URGED WHAT HE
CALLED A "SERIOUS DEBATE" ABOUT
LIFTING THE ECONOMIC EMBARGO.
THIS WEEKEND'S SUMMIT OF THE
AMERICAS MEETING WAS THE FIRST
TIME U.S. OFFICIALS DIDN'T BLOCK
CUBA'S ATTENDANCE AT THE
GATHERING.
>> Sreenivasan: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, HUNDREDS OF MOURNERS
GATHERED IN SOUTH CAROLINA TODAY
TO PAY RESPECTS TO WALTER SCOTT,
THE UNARMED AFRICAN-AMERICAN MAN
GUNNED DOWN LAST WEEK BY A NORTH
CHARLESTON POLICE OFFICER.
THE SHOOTING, WHICH WAS RECORDED
BY A BYSTANDER, SHOWED SCOTT
BEING SHOT IN THE BACK AS HE RAN
AWAY FROM OFFICER MICHAEL
SLAGER.
SLAGER WAS LATER FIRED AND
CHARGED WITH MURDER.
SCOTT'S CASKET, DRAPED BY AN
AMERICAN FLAG, WAS WHEELED INTO
HIS FAMILY CHURCH AS LOVED ONES
ARRIVED.
OTHER EVENTS HONORING SCOTT WERE
HELD THROUGHOUT THE CITY LAST
NIGHT AND TODAY.
A SECOND MAN HAS BEEN CHARGED IN
CONNECTION WITH THAT ALLEGED
FOILED PLOT TO SET OFF A CAR
BOMB AT AN ARMY BASE IN KANSAS.
ALEXANDER BLAIR WAS CHARGED WITH
FAILING TO REPORT A FELONY.
IF CONVICTED, HE COULD FACE UP
TO THREE YEARS IMPRISONMENT.
AUTHORITIES CLAIM HE KNEW OF
JOHN BOOKER'S PLANS TO PLANT THE
BOMB IN AN EFFORT TO KILL AS
MANY SOLDIERS AS POSSIBLE AT
FORT REILY.
BOOKER WAS ARRESTED YESTERDAY IN
AN F.B.I. STING OPERATION.
A MUSLIM CLERIC SAID TODAY
BOOKER IS MENTALLY ILL.
TO MARK THE UPCOMING FIFTH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE "DEEPWATER
HORIZON" EXPLOSION AND THE HUGE
GULF OIL SPILL THAT FOLLOWED,
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS SET
TO ANNOUNCE NEW REGULATIONS
COVERING OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS
DRILLING.
THIS, ACCORDING TO THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
THE NEWSPAPER SAYS THE
ADMINISTRATION WILL PROPOSE
TIGHTENING SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
ON WHAT ARE KNOWN AS BLOWOUT
PREVENTERS, WHAT IT DESCRIBES AS
THE LAST LINE OF PROTECTION TO
PREVENT EXPLOSIONS IN UNDERSEA
OIL AND GAS WELLS.
EVEN AS IT MOVES TO TIGHTEN
SAFETY RULES, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS SIGNALED THAT
IT WILL OPEN UP NEW AREAS IN THE
ATLANTIC TO DRILLING.
THE PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY
HAVE MADE PUBLIC THEIR TAX
RETURNS, AND THEY SHOW THAT THE
OBAMAS' ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME
LAST YEAR WAS A LITTLE LESS THAN
$500,000.
THAT'S ACTUALLY THE LOWEST
AMOUNT SINCE 2004 AS ROYALTIES
FROM THE PRESIDENT'S BOOK SALES
DECLINED.
THE OBAMAS PAID MORE THAN
$93,000 IN TAXES, JUST LESS THAN
20% OF THEIR INCOME; AND THEY
DONATED MORE THAN $70,000 TO
CHARITY, NEARLY 15% OF THEIR
INCOME.
A FLORIDA EYE CLINIC HAS AGREED
TO PAY ONE OF ITS FORMER
EMPLOYEES $150,000 AFTER BEING
SUED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
FOR ALLEGED TRANSGENDER
DISCRIMINATION.
THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION SAID BRANDI BRANSON
WAS WRONGFULLY FIRED AFTER
TRANSITIONING FROM MALE TO
FEMALE.
ACTIVISTS SAY THE RULING COULD
HELP ESTABLISH NEW LEGAL
PROTECTIONS FOR TRANSGENDER
AMERICANS.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
THE SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS AND
THE CHANGING U.S.-CUBAN
RELATIONSHIP, WE ARE JOINED NOW
BY CARLA ROBBINS.
SHE IS AN ADJUNCT SENIOR FELLOW
AT THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN
RELATIONS.
SO, WHY WAS THIS MEETING SO
IMPORTANT?
>> IT WAS THE FIRST TIME IN 50
YEARS THERE WAS A DIRECTOR OF
DIRECT CONVERSATION BETWEEN A
CUBAN PRESIDENT AND AMERICAN
PRESIDENT.
OF COURSE, OBVIOUSLY, THE FIRST
TIME SINCE COMMUNIST RULE CAME
TO CUBA, AND IT IS GOING TO BE
THE BEGINNING OF A NEW AND
BEAUTIFUL FRIENDSHIP.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT CAME OUT
OF THE MEETING, WHAT DIDN'T?
>> WE DON'T KNOW EXACTLY WHAT
CAME OUT OF THE MEETING JUST
YET, BUT PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID HE
WANTS TO NORMALIZE
RELATIONSHIPS.
THEY WANT TO OPEN EMBASSIES.
RIGHT NOW, THERE ARE
INTERSECTIONS BOTH IN CUBA AND
THE UNITED STATES.
SO IT'S THE BEGINNING OF
NORMALIZING RELATIONS, BUT
THE EMBARGO IS NOT GOING TO BE
LIFTED YET.
>> Sreenivasan: THE EMBARGO
IS NOT GOING TO BE LIFTED AND
THERE'S A BIG CATCH THAT CUBA IS
INTERESTED IN IS GETTING OFF THE
LIST OF STATE-SPONSORED TERROR.
THEY ARE STILL ON THERE.
>> THEY ARE STILL ON THERE, AND
CASTRO HAS SAID THEY ARE NOT
EVEN GOING TO OPEN THE EMBASSIES
UNTIL THAT HAPPENS.
THE PRESIDENT WAS VERY COY THIS
WEEK.
HE SAID HE GOT HIS
RECOMMENDATION FROM THE STATE
DEPARTMENT BUT HE HASN'T SAID
WHAT IT'S GOING TO BE.
WHETHER IT HAPPENS TODAY OR IN A
FEW WEEKS, IT WILL DEFINITELY
HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS HAS
A RIPPLE EFFECT BECAUSE
BUSINESSES DON'T WANT TO BE
DOING BUSINESS WITH A COUNTRY ON
THAT LIST.
>> MORE IMPORTANTLY, IT'S THE
BANKING SANCTIONS ISSUE THAT
THEY'RE VERY SENSITIVE.
CUBANS SAY THEY CAN'T EVEN USE A
CREDIT CARD.
AMERICAN COMPANIES AND
PARTICULARLY THE TELECOM
COMPANIES, WHICH IS WHAT
OBAMA HOPES IS GOING TO
GO IN THERE BECAUSE THAT'S THE
WHOLE POINT OF THE OPENING, THEY
DON'T WANT TO GET ON THE WRONG
SIDE OF THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, RAUL CASTRO
WAS ALLOTTED HIS EIGHT MINUTES,
HE WENT FOR 48 MINUTES AND
DECIDED TO GIVE THE ENTIRE
AUDIENCE A HISTORY LESSON OF
CUBA-U.S. RELATIONS.
>> 48 MINUTES IS VERY SHORT FOR
CASTRO TO SPEAK.
>> Sreenivasan: HE RAILED
AGAINST U.S. POLICY BUT SPARED
OBAMA.
>> HE APOLOGIZED TO OBAMA.
HE SAID, "YOUNGSTER, YOU'RE
NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS ONE."
THIS IS A MOMENT, AN
EXTRAORDINARY MOMENT ON BOTH
SIDES FOR THE TWO OF THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: COMPARE THAT
TO THE HEAD OF VENEZUELA, THE
HEAD OF ECUADOR MAKING VERY
BOMBASTIC STATEMENTS AGAINST
CURRENT U.S. POLICY AS THEY WERE
SPEAKING.
>> ON THE OTHER HAND, THIS WAS A
SORT OF AN EXTRAORDINARY MOMENT
IN THE SENSE THAT OBAMA WAS
VERY, VERY DEEPLY EMBRACED BY
THE... BY EVERYONE ELSE THERE
BECAUSE THEY HAD BEEN INSISTING
FOR THE LAST TWO SUMMITS THAT
THE U.S. GET RID OF THIS RELIC
OF THE COLD WAR, WHICH IS THE
EMBARGO-- SORRY, THE END OF THIS
RELATIONSHIP.
>> Sreenivasan: NONE OF THIS
HAPPENS IN A VACUUM.
THIS IS HAPPENING AT A TIME WHEN
WE'RE STILL IN CONVERSATIONS
WITH IRAN, AND KIND OF PAINT
THOSE CONNECTIONS FOR US.
WHY DOES ONE AFFECT THE OTHER?
>> WELL, BECAUSE, YOU KNOW,
IRAN OBVIOUSLY IS THE BOGEYMAN
BUT CUBA HAS BEEN THE BOGEYMAN
FOR A VERY LONG PERIOD OF TIME.
THE NEGOTIATION WITH IRAN AND
THE SANCTIONS ON IRAN IS THE
NUMBER ONE... THE NUMBER
ONE LEGACY ISSUE, AND OBVIOUSLY
THE NUMBER ONE NATIONAL SECURITY
ISSUE BECAUSE OF THE NUCLEAR
RELATIONSHIP AND GREAT CONCERN
THERE.
AND THE SAME PEOPLE OPPOSED
TO LIFTING-- IMPROVING RELATIONS
WITH CUBA ARE VERY, VERY MUCH
OPPOSED TO LIFTING SANCTIONS
ON IRAN.
AND THE PRESIDENT HAS TO BE VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT THIS NOTION THAT
SOMEHOW HE IS SOFT ON DICTATORS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS IS,
OF COURSE, IN THE CONTEXT OF AT
LEAST A COUPLE OF PEOPLE
ANNOUNCING THEIR PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGNS TOMORROW.
>> MARCO RUBIO, VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT THAT RIGHT NOW.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A HEARING
ON THIS LEGISLATION IN WHICH THE
CONGRESS IS INSISTING THAT IT'S
GOING TO HAVE TO HAVE A VOICE ON
THE LIFTING OF SANCTIONS, AND
THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN ON
TUESDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
CARLA ROBBINS FROM THE COUNCIL
ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE YOU TO HAWAII,
A STATE WHOSE RESIDENTS HAVE THE
HIGHEST MONTHLY ELECTRICITY
BILLS IN THE NATION.
AFTER ALL, IT TAKES PLENTY OF
TIME AND MONEY TO SHIP OIL AND
COAL THERE, SO IT MAKES SENSE
THAT MORE AND MORE HAWAIIANS ARE
TURNING TO AN ANOTHER,
POTENTIALLY LESS EXPENSIVE
SOURCE OF ENERGY, ONE THAT'S ALL
AROUND THEM: THE SUN.
BUT CONVERTING TO SOLAR ENERGY
HAS PROVEN ANYTHING BUT SIMPLE
IN HAWAII, AND WHAT'S HAPPENING
THERE COULD BE A PREVIEW OF
THINGS TO COME ELSEWHERE IN THE
NATION.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MIKE TAIBBI REPORTS FROM OAHU,
HAWAII.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE EVERYWHERE
ON OAHU-- ON THE ROOFS OF
BUSINESSES, LIBRARIES AND ONE
HOUSE AFTER ANOTHER.
THE AMOUNT OF ROOFTOP SOLAR NOW
ACCOUNTS FOR 12% OF THE ELECTRIC
UTILITY'S USERS.
THAT'S MORE THAN 20 TIMES THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE, BY FAR THE
HIGHEST PENETRATION OF
INDIVIDUAL ROOFTOP SOLAR IN THE
COUNTRY.
BUT IN THIS TROPICAL STATE,
WHERE THE COMBINATION OF SKY-
HIGH ENERGY PRICES, ABUNDANT
SUNSHINE AND FEDERAL AND STATE
TAX CREDITS MAKES GOING SOLAR A
NO-BRAINER, THE VERY POPULARITY
OF THESE PANELS HAS BECOME A
PROBLEM.
SO, WE DRIVE UP, AND YOU HAVE
THESE LOVELY SOLAR PANELS ON
YOUR ROOF.
HOW'S THAT WORKING OUT FOR YOU?
>> (LAUGHS)
IT'S NOT!
>> Reporter: NOT WORKING OUT
BECAUSE BY THE TIME AIRCRAFT
MECHANIC CARLTON HO JOINED THE
ROOFTOP SOLAR PARADE IN
SEPTEMBER 2013, THERE WERE SO
MANY PEOPLE IN HIS AREA THAT HAD
INSTALLED PANELS THAT THE LOCAL
UTILITY COMPANY TOLD HIM AND
MANY OTHERS "DON'T TURN ON THAT
SWITCH YET."
SO, IT'S JUST A QUESTION OF
TURNING THE SWITCH ON AND YOU
HAVE JUICE.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: FROM YOUR OWN ROOF.
>> AND EVERYTHING IS AWESOME!
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S NOT THAT
SIMPLE.
WHEN YOU INSTALL SOLAR PANELS,
YOU'RE STILL RELIANT ON THE
LOCAL UTILITY.
WHEN IT'S DARK OR WHEN THE SUN
ISN'T SHINING, YOU NEED THE GRID
TO PROVIDE ELECTRICITY.
EVEN SO, SOLAR CUSTOMERS HAVE A
FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UTILITY
BECAUSE WHEN THE SUN IS SHINING
ANY EXTRA ENERGY THEIR PANELS
GENERATE IS SUPPLIED BACK TO THE
GRID.
THAT EARNS A CREDIT, FURTHER
REDUCING THEIR ELECTRIC BILLS.
IN SOME SECTIONS OF OAHU, WITH
SO MANY HOMEOWNERS GOING SOLAR,
THE UTILITY SAID THE SAFETY AND
RELIABILITY OF THE GRID COULD BE
THREATENED, AND IT SLOWED TO A
CRAWL THE APPROVALS OF NEW
SYSTEMS.
>> WE'VE MADE A LOT OF PROGRESS,
BUT WE KNOW THERE IS STILL MORE
TO DO AS WE INCREASE ROOFTOP
SOLAR.
>> Reporter: COLTON CHING IS
VICE PRESIDENT FOR ENERGY
DELIVERY AT HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC
COMPANY, OR HECO AS THE UTILITY
IS KNOWN.
>> WHAT WAS HAPPENING WAS THAT
POWER, WHICH NORMALLY FLOWS FROM
THE GRID TO OUR CUSTOMERS, WAS
NOW BEGINNING TO FLOW BACK INTO
THOSE SUBSTATIONS, SUBSTATIONS
WHICH WERE NOT 30, 40 YEARS AGO
DESIGNED TO OPERATE IN THAT
MANNER.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION, HECO
HAD A HARD TIME MEASURING ALL
THAT SOLAR.
>> SO, RIGHT NOW, WE DON'T KNOW
EXACTLY HOW MUCH POWER ROOFTOP
SOLAR IS PRODUCING AT ANY GIVEN
MOMENT.
>> Reporter: SO, YOU CAN'T SEE
AT ALL WHAT 10% TO 12% OF YOUR
CUSTOMER BASE IS PROVIDING?
>> WE CANNOT.
WE CANNOT SEE THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT WHILE HECO
STUDIED THE PROBLEM, HOMEOWNERS
LIKE CARLTON HO WERE LEFT
WAITING.
IN HIS CASE, WAITING FOR A YEAR
AND A HALF WHILE HIS SYSTEM SAT
UNUSED.
IT'S GOT TO BE FRUSTRATING.
>> YES.
LIKE, YOU COME HOME, YOU LOOK AT
THE PANELS ON YOUR CEILING, AND
YOU KNOW YOU CAN'T DO ANYTHING
WITH IT.
THE BILL COMES EVERY MONTH.
YOU KNOW YOU'VE GOT TWO BILLS
BECAUSE I STILL HAVE MY
FINANCING.
I HAVE TO PAY FOR THAT.
I HAVE MY ELECTRIC BILLS, SO...
>> Reporter: HO WAS LEFT PAYING
HIS REGULAR ELECTRIC BILL,
AROUND $150 A MONTH, PLUS
ANOTHER $240 A MONTH IN PAYMENTS
FOR THE $23,000 SOLAR PANELS
THAT HE'D BOUGHT BUT WASN'T
PERMITTED TO USE.
>> HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC NEEDS TO
AND HAS TAKEN STEPS TO WORK WITH
OUR CUSTOMERS TO FIND SOLUTIONS
THAT WORKS FOR THEM AND WORKS
ON THE GRID.
AND WE HAVEN'T BEEN PERFECT.
IT HASN'T BEEN A PERFECTLY
SMOOTH PROCESS.
>> Reporter: THERE HAVE BEEN
SOME UGLY MOMENTS, FRANKLY.
>> THERE'S BEEN SOME VERY,
VERY TOUGH MOMENTS.
IT'S BEEN LEARNING MOMENTS FOR
US WITHIN THE UTILITY.
>> Reporter: AND FOR THE SOLAR
INDUSTRY, WHICH TOOK A BIG HIT
WHEN THE UTILITY SLOWED NEW
APPROVALS; THERE WERE HUNDREDS
OF LAYOFFS AND STOCKPILES OF
SOLAR EQUIPMENT.
BUT THOSE SOLAR CUSTOMERS
WAITING TO TURN ON THEIR SYSTEMS
OR EVEN GET PERMISSION TO START
CONSTRUCTION KNEW THAT GOING
SOLAR WOULD STILL BE A GOOD
DEAL; A SYSTEM UP AND RUNNING
WOULD REDUCE THEIR ENERGY BILLS
DRAMATICALLY.
IN THE MEANTIME, NON-SOLAR
CUSTOMERS-- STILL THE MAJORITY--
WERE PAYING MUCH MORE TO
MAINTAIN THE PUBLIC GRID THAN
THOSE WITH THEIR OWN PANELS ON
THE ROOF, A DISPARITY THAT HECO
SUGGESTED COULD BE UNFAIR.
>> IT MAKES SENSE THAT EVERYONE
WHO USES THE GRID SHOULD PAY
THEIR SHARE TO MAINTAIN AND
IMPROVE IT BECAUSE EVERYONE
BENEFITS FROM IT.
>> Reporter: HECO SAYS THAT NON-
SOLAR CUSTOMERS HAVE IN A SENSE
BEEN SUBSIDIZING THOSE WITH
ROOFTOP SOLAR WHEN IT COMES TO
KEEPING THE GRID HUMMING, A COST
SHIFT ESTIMATED AT MORE THAN $50
MILLION.
ALL THESE PROBLEMS-- DELAYS,
QUESTIONS ABOUT GRID RELIABILITY
AND FAIRNESS-- COULD SOON BE
SEEN ALL ACROSS THE COUNTRY AS
THE PENETRATION OF ROOFTOP SOLAR
CONTINUES TO INCREASE.
SOLAR PANELS ARE NO LONGER JUST
FOR SUNBELT STATES; EVEN THE
WHITE HOUSE HAD PANELS INSTALLED
LAST MAY.
>> OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS, THE
COST OF SOLAR PANELS HAVE FALLEN
BY 60%.
SOLAR INSTALLATIONS HAVE
INCREASED BY 500%.
>> Reporter: BUT ROOFTOP SOLAR
ON A MASSIVE SCALE HAS
CONSEQUENCES THAT ARE STILL
BEING MEASURED.
>> THE STATES ON THE MAINLAND
WILL EVENTUALLY BE HAVING TO
DEAL WITH SOME OF THE ISSUES
THAT WE'RE DEALING WITH HERE.
>> Reporter: DR. MARCO
MANGELSDORF IS A SOLAR
CONTRACTOR WHO ALSO TEACHES
ENERGY POLITICS.
HAWAII HAS BEEN CALLED A
"POSTCARD FROM THE FUTURE"
BECAUSE OF HOW MUCH ROOFTOP
SOLAR IS ALREADY OUT HERE.
>> WE ARE ON THE NEW FRONTIER IN
HAWAII AS FAR AS TRYING TO COME
UP WITH A PRACTICAL, SAFE ANSWER
TO A VERY, VERY DIFFICULT
QUESTION WHICH DOES NOT HAVE A
DEFINITIVE ANSWER.
>> Reporter: NAMELY, JUST HOW
MUCH ROOFTOP SOLAR CAN THE GRID
ACCOMMODATE?
AND WHILE DELAYS FOR ROOFTOP
SOLAR CUSTOMERS HAVE ANGERED
MANY IN HAWAII, MANGELSDORF
ARGUES THAT THE CAUTION SHOWN BY
THE UTILITY IS UNDERSTANDABLE.
>> YOU CANNOT ALLOW A FREE-FOR-
ALL-- ANYBODY AND EVERYBODY TO
CONNECT TO A UTILITY GRID
WITHOUT ANY TYPE OF REQUIREMENTS
OR MONITORING-- JUST AS YOU
CAN'T HAVE ANYBODY AND EVERYBODY
GET ON A FREEWAY WITH A BICYCLE,
WITH A HORSE, WITH A BUGGY, WITH
A MOPED.
I MEAN, THE UTILITY GRID IS A
PUBLIC GOOD, PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT MUST BE
MAINTAINED.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME SAY DELAYS
IN APPROVING ROOFTOP SOLAR ARE
LESS ABOUT PRUDENCE THAN ABOUT
PROFIT AND ABOUT PRESERVING THE
UTILITY'S CENTURY-OLD BUSINESS
MODEL AS A MONOPOLY.
>> THE PROBLEM IS THAT THEY
INHERENTLY DON'T WANT TO SEE
MORE OF THIS ROOFTOP SOLAR, AND
THEY ARE ALSO ARBITERS OF WHAT
POWER CAN COME ON OR WHAT'S
RELIABLE AND WHAT'S SAFE.
>> Reporter: ROBERT HARRIS IS
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC POLICY FOR
SUNRUN, ANOTHER SOLAR
CONTRACTOR.
HE SAYS THAT UTILITIES ARE
CAUTIOUS BY NATURE BUT THAT THEY
CAN'T IGNORE THE CHANGING
LANDSCAPE AROUND ROOFTOP SOLAR.
>> THE COMPARISON WOULD BE, FOR
EXAMPLE, THE TYPEWRITER INDUSTRY
TRYING TO STOP COMPUTERS BECAUSE
THEY WANT TO PRESERVE THEIR OWN
BUSINESS MODEL.
AND HERE YOU COULD ARGUE THAT
THERE'S A BETTER MODEL OUT THERE
THAT'S GOING TO BE CHEAPER AND
CLEANER.
YOU KNOW, WE NEED TO BE WORKING
HARD AND TRYING TO MAKE THAT
WORK BETTER, NOT JUST TRYING TO
STOP IT.
>> Reporter: DID HECO FAIL IN
SOME FUNDAMENTAL WAY TO SEE THE
FUTURE?
>> I DON'T THINK WE FAILED.
I DO... IN HINDSIGHT, I DO
BELIEVE THAT WE COULD HAVE SEEN
IT SOONER, BUT WE ARE UNDERGOING
A LITERAL TRANSFORMATION PROCESS
AS WE SPEAK.
IT IS THIS CHANGE IN
RELATIONSHIP, THE CHANGE IN THE
COMPACT BETWEEN THE UTILITY AND
ITS CUSTOMERS.
IT'S NO LONGER THE MONOPOLY
UTILITY THAT'S MAKING ALL OF THE
DECISIONS AND PASSING IT DOWN TO
ITS CUSTOMERS.
>> Reporter: HECO HAS APPROVALS
FOR ROOFTOP SOLAR MOVING AGAIN
AND HOPES TO TRIPLE THE AMOUNT
OF ROOFTOP SOLAR BY 2030, BUT IT
MAY NOT BE IN A POSITION TO
DECIDE.
LAST DECEMBER, HECO ANNOUNCED IT
WAS BEING SOLD TO NEXTERA, A
FLORIDA-BASED UTILITY GIANT.
IF THE DEAL WITH NEXTERA DOES GO
THROUGH, HAWAII'S ELECTRICITY
CONSUMERS WILL BE SERVICED BY A
COMPANY THAT SAYS IT IS
COMMITTED TO RENEWABLE ENERGY
SOURCES-- AT THIS POINT,
PRIMARILY UTILITY-SCALE SOLAR
AND WIND INSTALLATIONS.
THAT MEANS BIG SOLAR AND WIND
FARMS, WHICH TODAY PRODUCE MORE
RENEWABLE ENERGY ACROSS THE
COUNTRY THAN THE SMALL-SCALE
ROOFTOP SYSTEMS THAT ARE SO
POPULAR ON HAWAII.
IT'S STILL THE OLD MODEL,
THOUGH-- A UTILITY PRODUCING ALL
THE POWER, JUST USING A
DIFFERENT SOURCE AND SELLING IT
VIRTUALLY AS A MONOPOLY.
THAT IS NOT THE HAWAII WAY, OR
AT LEAST THE WAY MANY HERE HAVE
SAID THEY INSIST ON GOING-- TO
HAVE A CHOICE.
>> ONCE WE GET THIS THING
POWERED, A YEAR AND A HALF OF
FRUSTRATION, WE'LL GET OVER IT.
>> Reporter: FOR CARLTON HO AND
HIS FAMILY, THAT DAY FINALLY
ARRIVED AFTER A YEAR AND A HALF
OF WAITING.
THEY GOT PERMISSION TO TURN THAT
SWITCH ON LAST MONTH, AND THEIR
SOLAR SYSTEM IS NOW UP AND
RUNNING.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE HOW SOME
HAWAII RESIDENTS HAVE MANAGED TO
START LIVING OFF THE GRID.
WATCH OUR VIDEO ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO THE
ARTS.
MORE THAN 65 YEARS AGO, IN THE
LATE 1940s, "LIFE" MAGAZINE
ASSIGNED ACCLAIMED PHOTOGRAPHER
GORDON PARKS TO SHOOT A PIECE
DEPICTING LIFE FOR AFRICAN-
AMERICANS UNDER SEGREGATION.
HE CHOSE TO RETURN HOME AND
PROFILE HIS FORMER CLASSMATES IN
KANSAS.
BUT THE SERIES WAS NEVER
PUBLISHED AND THE PICTURES NEVER
SAW THE LIGHT OF DAY, UNTIL NOW.
JARED BOWEN OF WGBH HAS OUR
STORY.
>> Reporter: THIS WAS THE
PICTURE THAT LAUNCHED THE MUSEUM
OF FINE ARTS' KAREN HAAS ON A
CURATORIAL QUEST TO LEARN WHAT
BROUGHT PHOTOGRAPHER GORDON
PARKS BACK TO FORT SCOTT,
KANSAS, HIS HOMETOWN, IN 1950.
WHAT SHE UNCOVERED WAS A TROVE,
A COMPREHENSIVE LOOK AT BLACK
LIFE UNDER SEGREGATION.
>> HE HAD THE POWER TO GO BACK
AND TELL THE STORIES OF AFRICAN
AMERICAN FAMILIES-- FRIENDS OF
HIS, PEOPLE WHO TRUSTED HIM, WHO
LOOKED RIGHT INTO HIS CAMERA AND
WHO REALLY BELIEVED THAT HE
WOULD DO RIGHT BY THEM; THAT HE
HAD THIS OPPORTUNITY TO SORT OF
COUNTER ALL THE STEREOTYPES OF
AFRICAN AMERICANS.
>> Reporter: THIS EXHIBITION
COMPRISES THE PHOTOGRAPHS PARKS
TOOK ON ASSIGNMENT FOR "LIFE"
MAGAZINE.
HE HAD PITCHED THE STORY, TO
RETURN HOME TO KANSAS FOR AN
EXTREMELY PERSONAL TAKE ON
SEGREGATION.
>> HE DECIDES TO GO BACK AND
SEEK OUT HIS CLASSMATES FROM
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL-- AND IT TURNS
OUT IT WAS THE ENTIRE CLASS OF
1927 THAT HE WAS LOOKING FOR,
ALL THE 11 CLASSMATES-- AND TO
LOOK AT WHERE THEIR LIVES HAD
GONE AND WHAT THEIR EXPERIENCES
HAD BEEN IN THE 20-PLUS YEARS
SINCE HE'D SEEN THEM.
>> Reporter: IT WASN'T EASY FOR
PARKS TO RETURN HOME.
KANSAS AND FORT SCOTT HAD BEEN
RIFE WITH RACISM THROUGHOUT HIS
HARDSCRABBLE CHILDHOOD.
>> HE WAS THE YOUNGEST OF 15
CHILDREN.
HIS FATHER WAS A TENANT FARMER,
HIS MOTHER WAS A MAID.
HE DESCRIBED HIS LIFE AS HAVING
BEEN DISCRIMINATED AGAINST AND
REALLY FELT THE NEED TO GET
AWAY.
>> Reporter: AS HE TRACKED DOWN
HIS CLASSMATES SOME 20 YEARS
AFTER HE'D LAST SEEN THEM, HE
FOUND THAT NEARLY ALL HAD MOVED
AWAY, SOME TO CHICAGO'S SOUTH
SIDE.
>> HE FOUND ONE FRIEND, MASEL,
WHO WAS IN VERY DIRE STRAITS,
AND HE DESCRIBED HER AS THE
CLASS TRAGEDY.
SHE WAS LIVING WITH AN ABUSIVE
HUSBAND WHO ACTUALLY HELD UP
GORDON PARKS WITH A GUN AND TOOK
ALL HIS MONEY.
>> Reporter: SHE WAS THE
EXCEPTION.
BY AND LARGE, PARKS FOUND HIS
CLASSMATES, LIKE HIMSELF, HAD
IMPROVED THEIR LIVES.
>> ANOTHER ONE OF HIS CLASSMATE
HAD FOUND A VERY BIG JOB AT
CAMPBELL SOUP WHICH APPARENTLY
WAS A FACTORY THAT HIRED A LOT
OF AFRICAN AMERICAN WORKERS.
SO, SOME PEOPLE WERE LIVING VERY
MIDDLE-CLASS LIVES, BUT NEARLY
ALL OF THE FAMILIES THAT HE MET
WITH WERE LIVING IN MOSTLY
AFRICAN AMERICAN NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> Reporter: "LIFE" MAGAZINE
NEVER PUBLISHED THE PARKS STORY.
HAAS SPECULATES IT WAS BUMPED
FOR BREAKING NEWS, AND, BY THE
TIME IT COULD BE PUBLISHED, THE
SUBJECTS' LIVES HAD ALREADY
CHANGED DRAMATICALLY.
SO, HERE, 65 YEARS LATER, PARKS'
PERSPECTIVE FINALLY SEES THE
LIGHT OF DAY.
>> ONE VERY EXCITING THING IS
THAT WE'VE RECENTLY REPRODUCED
ONE OF THE IMAGES FROM THE
EXHIBITION OF A LITTLE GIRL
PLAYING THE PIANO WITH HER
MOTHER SITTING NEXT TO HER.
AND JUST OUT OF THE BLUE HAVE
BEEN CONTACTED BY THIS LITTLE
GIRL WHO TURNS OUT TO BE NOW IN
HER LATE 60s LIVING IN ARIZONA,
A FASCINATING STORY.
HAD A WONDERFUL CONVERSATION
WITH HER ABOUT HER MOTHER ABOUT
GROWING UP IN CHICAGO.
AND I'M THRILLED TO SEE THAT IN
MANY WAYS, HER LIFE WAS EXACTLY
WHAT HER MOTHER HAD HOPED FOR
HER, AND SHE WENT ON TO DO MANY
OF THE THINGS HER MOTHER WAS NOT
ABLE TO DO IN HER OWN LIFE.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN KEVIN CARR
CROSSED THE FINISH LINE IN
DEVON, ENGLAND, EARLIER THIS
WEEK, HE COMPLETED A TEST OF
ENDURANCE AND BROKE A RECORD FOR
RUNNING AROUND THE WORLD IN THE
FASTEST TIME.
CARR TOOK ON THE CHALLENGE TO
RAISE AWARENESS FOR MENTAL
ILLNESS, SOMETHING HE SUFFERED
FROM EARLIER IN HIS LIFE.
I.T.N.'S RUPERT EVELYN REPORTS.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: FOR THE LAST 20
MONTHS, KEVIN CARR HAS RUN MORE
THAN A MARATHON A DAY.
HAVING LEFT IN THE SUMMER OF
2013, HE FINALLY COMPLETES WHAT
IS BY ANY MEASURE AN EPIC
JOURNEY.
IT HAS BEEN BOTH A PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL TEST OF ENDURANCE FOR A
MAN WHO BY HIS OWN ADMISSION HAS
HAD HIS OWN DEMONS TO OVERCOME.
>> I JUST WANTED TO PROVE IF YOU
HAVE BEEN MENTALLY ILL OR ARE
SUFFERING AT THE MOMENT, THAT
YOU SHOULDN'T LET ANYONE TELL
YOU IT'S A WEAKNESS.
I'VE LITERALLY JUST TAKEN ON THE
WORLD.
>> Reporter: MILLIONS OF STEPS,
THOUSANDS OF MILES, AND THE
WORLD RECORD FOR RUNNING AROUND
THE WORLD.
>> IT'S DEFINITELY
UNCOMFORTABLE, YOU KNOW, NOT
FUN.
IT'S... AND FOR LONG STRETCHES.
YOU MIGHT HAVE A BAD MONTH.
>> Reporter: MOSTLY ALONE ON A
GLOBAL ROAD, THE WORLD HAS
THROWN EVERYTHING AT HIM--
FROZEN IN NORWAY, BITTEN BY
MOSQUITOES IN INDIA, AND DWARFED
BY THE ANDES-- BUT IT WAS PEOPLE
WHO WERE THE GREATEST THREAT.
>> EVERYONE ASKS ABOUT THE
BEARS, WOLVES, SCORPIONS, SNAKES
AND WHATNOT, IT'S REALLY THE BAD
ROADS OR BAD DRIVING AND A
MIXTURE OF THE TWO.
>> Reporter: HIS JOURNEY TOOK
621 DAYS, DURING WHICH TIME HE
COVERED 26 COUNTRIES, MORE THAN
16,000 MILES.
THAT'S AN AVERAGE OF 31 MILES A
DAY.
HE GOT THROUGH 16 PAIRS OF
SHOES, ENDURED TEMPERATURE
RANGING FROM MINUS 26 TO 40
DEGREES CELSIUS, AND CONSUMED
OVER 10,000 CALORIES A DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
THE U.S. CAPITOL WAS PLACED ON
LOCKDOWN FOR SEVERAL HOURS THIS
AFTERNOON AFTER GUNFIRE OUTSIDE
THE BUILDING.
POLICE LATER DETERMINED IT WAS A
SUICIDE.
AUTHORITIES ALSO INVESTIGATED A
SUSPICIOUS PACKAGE LEFT ON A
TERRACE THERE.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.